# AEDeep-Disruption-Prediction
*Machine Learning for Plasma Disruption Prediction in Solar and Tokamak Systems*

## Authors
**Preliminary Study of Disruption Prediction with Machine Learning: from Solar Plasma to Tokamaks**

Carlos E. Falandes¹*, Reinaldo R. Rosa¹, Salatiel A. A. Jordão¹, Rubens A. Sautter², Luan O. Barauna¹,  
Jiro Kawamura³, Pablo A. Medina Sanchez⁴, Juan A. Valdivia⁵, Daniel A. S. Mendes¹

¹ National Institute for Space Research (INPE), S.J. dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil  
² Federal University of Technology (UTFPR), Brazil  
³ International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER), France  
⁴ University of Los Andes, Colombia  
⁵ Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile

## Abstract 
Plasma disruptions represent critical risks both in magnetically confined fusion devices and in astrophysical environments such as the solar corona. Despite their different scales and configurations, these systems share a nonlinear magnetohydrodynamic behavior that can lead to instabilities and abrupt loss of confinement or energy release, respectively.

Motivated by the challenge of effectively treating disruptions and anomalies in plasma dynamics, we present criteria and a methodology to simulate, detect and predict disruptions in plasma dynamics in different contexts. The methodology, which we call here AEDeep (Anomaly Explorer with Deep Learning), is based on the simulation and prediction of extreme fluctuation patterns generated by multiplicative cascades, compatible with the dynamics of plasma instability and prediction models based on recurrent neural networks (RNN).

In this preliminary version, to treat disruptions in time series, we use the multifractal p-model and an LSTM (Long-Short Term Memory) model. We validate the methodology, in its simplest version, using data from solar EUV images observed by SDO/AIA and also from tokamak disruptions obtained by the JOREK simulator.

For both cases, we show results evidencing the detection of precursors with good accuracy, early and precise. We also outline future directions for the implementation of the second strategy based on LSTM autoencoder, which will enable cutting-edge AI embedded in CubeSats for space weather forecasting and, in the case of tokamaks, the integration with advanced quantum sensing materials implanted in their magnets.

These advances point to broader applications of AEDeep in the detection of spatiotemporal anomalies in physics and engineering.
